Something very humbling is out there
####################################
:author: Stefano
:category: Astronomy

On a dark, clear night, if you walk far away from the city lights, you
will be probably able to see a magnificent strike of light we call "the
milky way", our galaxy. It looks like this:

.. image:: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Perseid_Meteor.jpg
   :alt: image
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

Our sun is a small, insignificant star, sitting on one of the arms of
this magnificent spiral of stars and gas clouds. Any star you can see
clearly with your naked eye belongs to the Milky Way, and it's generally
very close to us: hundreds or thousands of light years, small amounts
when compared with the 26.000 light years that separates us from the
galactic center.

Between October 2007 and August 2009, Alex Mellinger traveled around the
globe taking incredible high resolution pictures of the Milky Way. Chunk
by chunk, he produced one of the most stunning `visual representations
of our galaxy <http://galaxy.phy.cmich.edu/~axel/mwpan2/>`_. The image
can be zoomed, panned, explored. Play with it, I'll wait right here.

Our galaxy is definitely not alone in the dark void of the universe. On
the bottom right of the image you can enjoy the vision two nearby
companions, the Large Magellan Cloud and the Small Magellan Cloud. They
are smaller, irregular, and quite close to us. People living in the
southern hemisphere enjoy these two objects of the night sky.

If you shift your attention to the left of the picture, you will
probably notice a small diagonal bit of yellow light, just a little
below the Milky Way. Zoom in, it's a good friend the Andromeda galaxy:

.. image:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/71/M31_Lanoue.png
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image
   :align: center

The Andromeda galaxy can be seen with the naked eye on a clear night.
It's quite far: 2.2 millions light years, but still pretty close. Its
shape is close to the Milky Way's one. Being so far, the photons we see
today left the galaxy 2.2 millions year ago, and traveled since then to
finally reach our eyes. This means that what we see right now it is the
Andromeda galaxy as it was 2.2 millions years ago. Those photons left
those stars when humanity was just leaving the trees.

There are other galaxies around in the sky. Each one is full of stars,
each star probably full of planets. Each one far from us, the farther
they are, the more back in time we look. We developed powerful
telescopes in the last decades. One of them is probably the most well
known, and the one that returned the most humbling and amazing images:
the Hubble Space Telescope. Far high above the turbulent atmosphere, the
HST has the best view of the sky we can ask for. So one day we point it
at a patch of sky no larger than a pin, and slowly accumulate the
photons hitting the detector. One photon after another, an image is
formed. It is the `Hubble Deep Field <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubble_Deep_Field>`_.

.. image:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/HubbleDeepField.800px.jpg/594px-HubbleDeepField.800px.jpg
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image
   :align: center

Every bit of light in this image is a galaxy. A full galaxy, full of
stars. And they are far. The more far we look, the more we approach the
time of the Big Bang. So we continued looking, deeper and deeper. The
`Hubble Deep Field
South <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubble_Deep_Field_South>`_, the
`Ultra Deep
Field <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubble_Ultra_Deep_Field>`_. More
galaxies. Everywhere we point our telescope, in bits of sky no larger
than pin tips, we find galaxies, more galaxies, again galaxies. Galaxies
everywhere, with stars, some of them with planets for sure.

We pushed even more. This image has been taken a few days ago, again
from Hubble

.. image:: http://forthescience.org/blog/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/hs-2009-31-a-large_web.jpg
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image
   :align: center

This image contains galaxies whose light left for its quest of reaching
us 13 billion years ago. Yes, some of these galaxies were there after
just 600 million years after the Big Bang, dated by WMAP measurements
13.7 billion years ago. They are the oldest galaxies ever seen.

This is just the beginning. We continue taking pictures of other parts
of the sky. `More
galaxies <http://www.cfht.hawaii.edu/images/CFHTLS-D1-Zoom/>`_. Very
soon we are sending up a new space telescope, the `James Webb
telescope <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Webb_Space_Telescope>`_.
We want to see more, we want to peek back in time and approach those
crucial moments where everything we know began. We explore it from the
immense big of the sky, and from the immense small of the Large Hadron
Collider. From our tiny, insignificant water-covered rocky planet, we
need to understand, we need to see, and we need to find the truth. And
it will happen in our lifetime.

