Curiosity. It's just that.
##########################
:author: Stefano
:category: Meetings, Opinion

I am currently at Stansted, waiting for my flight. After two very
intense days, I must say. The Amazing Meeting was already amazing by
sheer definition, but it went beyond that. Great showmen and great
scientists. Interesting discussions ranging from science to philosophy,
psychology, and freedom of press. Magicians performed in front of my
very eyes, at 50 cm distance, and I could not see the trick. Attendance
was high: 600 people, from basically everywhere in Europe. Definitely a
strong indicator that a "TAMLondon 2" will be required, and again
guaranteed to sell out next year.

Above anything else, one word can express the pure essence of the
meeting: curiosity. I am pretty sure I am not mistaken if I claim that
every single person attending the meeting was once a child disassembling
his brand new toy to understand how it worked. His/her pleasure came
from discovery and understanding the trick inside the black box, knowing
that during the process the toy was not broken, and if by chance it did
break, he could fix it.

This child has grown, and he is now a man or a woman. The toy has now
been replaced by the environment, the sick person, the need to
communicate, travel, have fun and enjoy a good life. The focus has
shifted from trivial to serious. He/She is a tiny but important part of
the incredible human hive-mind able to invent solutions for humankind's
problems: lack of renewable energies, contain global warming, send
people to Mars, stop HIV, produce better materials, inform and spread
culture effectively, make people's life worthy and enjoyable with a
smile. He/She is driven by curiosity, because after all he is still a
child, an experienced one, but nevertheless still a child. He doesn't
need anything else.

Of course, recognition and acknowledge from peers brings satisfaction,
but it should not be his driving force, nor should be Awards. Feynman
puts this concept very bluntly, but to the point:

(Reality, however, is a bit different. Awards are part of a researcher
curriculum, which is important to work in academia. In any case, the
nature of a curious person is intrinsic, regardless of any job-related
formalism)

Many (most) unsung creative minds made groundbreaking findings, but were
unknown or even opposed by the scientific and non-scientific community
for years, sometimes even centuries. It did not stop their spirit,
because they were curious, they wanted to open the toy and look inside.
Thanks to them, today we live twice as much as our ancestors one
thousand year ago. We found and synthesized molecules able to interact
with our body mechanisms, and improve our health. Our scientific
throughput has skyrocketed, in some cases literally: we sent pieces of
human equipment into the depths of space. We landed on other planets,
and we have powerful telescopes able to detect solar systems similar to
our own. We built one of the largest machines ever imagined, the LHC, to
open the toy even more and understand the basic mechanisms of the
elementary forces.

All of this, just because we are curious animals, driven by questions
that need answers, and thrilled with the strange and mysterious nature
of curiosity itself: it allows you to walk unknown paths. You don't know
what you will find around the next corner: as a side product of LHC, we
have the World Wide Web... and therefore Wikipedia, online banking,
amazon, twitter, this blog, facebook, google. Who would have expected it
?

There are good reasons to be curious.
