No shame for "Import your contacts" feature
###########################################
:author: Stefano
:category: Security

I am negatively astonished (`and I am not
alone <http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/001128.html>`_) by a
new diffuse practice of many networking websites: during the
registration process, they ask your Gmail (or other webmail’s) personal
username and password, so to login on your behalf and import your
address book contacts.

What?

Giving your personal password to another website allows them to poke
into your mail account, where you can have your personal emails
(containing eventually other passwords), documents, calendars and so on.
You are potentially handing them your (and a bit of your contacts')
digital life. Despite the disclaimers of honesty of these sites, even
honest and very respectable companies can happen to have dishonest
employees. Finally, there’s also a fair chance that you are violating
the `Gmail terms of
service <http://www.google.com/accounts/TOS?hl=en>`_, which clearly
state (paragraph 5.3) that your password is confidential. Other
interesting paragraphs are 6.1 and 6.2, which in my opinion could
entitle for a TOS violation as well.

But apart of these facts, what I consider most dangerous is to pass this
practice as “normal” or “acceptable” just because it looks convenient
and easy. I wonder what people would say if they were asked to hand out
their home keys to the shop where they just bought a TV, so that the
shipment can take place with no additional fuss for them. The user is
generally the weakest point in security, and educating him/her in the
wrong direction is really something to be worried about.
