How I ate Fugu and survived to tell the tale
############################################
:author: Stefano
:category: Biology, Food, Personal

Some time ago I had Fugu, or `puffer
fish <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fugu>`_, a highly poisonous fish with
no known antidote. Here is a picture to document the fact

.. image:: http://forthescience.org/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/fugu_dinner.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image

Well, it could just be me in front of something that looks like fish,
and I'm not going to eat it anyway, but trust me, I had it. Yes, I
wanted to take the risk of dying from tetrodotoxin poisoning. After all,
we live only once (very appropriate), and since I'm here, why not try it
out? Also, note the smile of a sushi lover dream come true.

So, how does Fugu work ? A specialized chef prepares the puffer fish
with a proper cutting process, removing all parts containing poison, and
leaving only the edible ones. In particular, the liver is among the
deadly parts, and is therefore removed completely. Other parts, like the
meat, the fins, parts of the head, are safe to consume, all going into a
rather particular dinner. Unfortunately I was not able to watch the
cutting process: the chef was behind a bench (you can see him in the
picture), but apparently he did a proper job, since I am still alive.

Why is puffer fish so poisonous? The culprit is a substance it
accumulates, tetrodotoxin, probably obtained from diet or produced from
symbiotic bacteria ingested by the fish. This molecule disrupts nerve
signal transmission leading to body paralysis, starting from the lips
and tongue, then the hands, then to all the rest, including the
diafragm. With no control on the diafragm, the victim is unable to
breathe, and dies of asphyxiation. During the whole process, which
occurs in a matter of hours, the victim is fully conscious and awake,
just unable to move, speak, and (in the end) breathe. This is because
tetrodotoxin is not able to enter the brain, leaving its nerve tissues
unscathed. Scary isn't it ? The poison is so powerful that 1 milligram
(the quantity you can put on the tip of a pin) is enough to kill a
human. A single pufferfish contains enough poison to kill tens of
people. If you are taken early, kept breathing and get the toxin removed
from your body, you can survive the poison and recover completely.

Nerve signal transmission is actuated by an exchange of sodium and
potassium ions on the two different sides of the nerve cell membrane.
The different ion concentration gives rise to a difference of potential,
maintained at the expense of energy. There is an enzyme, known as `the
sodium-potassium
pump <http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072495855/student_view0/chapter2/animation__how_the_sodium_potassium_pump_works.html>`_,
on the surface of the nerve cell membrane, with the task of keeping this
unbalance by actively carrying three sodium ions outside the cell, and
two potassium ions inside the cell at every cycle. The nerve cell stays
"loaded and ready" to transmit the signal. When a signal transmission is
triggered, sodium ions are allowed to flow back into the cell in a
cascade event, trying to re-establish the equilibrium and suppress the
gradient. This is made possible by another enzyme, a `sodium transport
channel <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_channel>`_. Tetrodotoxin
binds strongly with this channel, thus preventing the sodium to enter
the membrane. In some sense, it acts like a cork. Without this mechanism
in place, the signal is no longer able to travel along the nerves down
to the muscles, and paralysis ensues.

Is eating fugu really so dangerous? According to `this
site <http://www.chm.bris.ac.uk/motm/ttx/ttx.htm>`_, incidents are
approximately less than 100 per year, with a 10 to 50 % mortality. Most,
probably all, of these cases are untrained people eating their own
catch. The probability of dying from a certified, experienced Fugu chef
are close to negligible, and probably your life is more in danger while
driving to the restaurant.

The price for a Fugu dinner is high: 30.000 Yen (230 Euro) for a full
course dinner for me and my host, and it is definitely not worth it. The
consistency remembers rubber band, and the taste is basically neutral.
The dinner therefore focuses on additional herbs, sauces and preparation
to please your senses, with the fish as an additional, risky business.
Definitely interesting once in a lifetime, as a "been there, done that"
story, but for a much lower price I can have a delicious Italian meal
where my taste buds really get involved the right way.

References

-  http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/818763-overview
-  http://www.life.umd.edu/grad/MLfsc/zctsim/ionchannel.html
-  http://www.chm.bris.ac.uk/motm/ttx/ttx.htm

