Fast brains in slow actuators: limited by our slow body
#######################################################
:author: Stefano
:category: Biology

Occasionally, I have to write using a pen. I've never had a beautiful
calligraphy (by the way, a tautology, since calligraphy already comes
from the Greek for "beautiful writing") but I realized that with time my
skills became worse and worse. The reason, I feel, is that my brain
wants a higher throughput of concepts than my body can achieve in
practice. My writing gets worse because I want to write faster to deal
with my stream of thoughts, hence my accuracy for better lines and
circles goes down.

So apparently our hands and fingers are slower at transmitting data than
the stream of thoughts arising from our brain. They are, in other words,
a bandwidth bottleneck. This is true, but not the only factor: our
actuators can be much faster, but calligraphy itself is intrinsically
slow. Handwriting allows you to express around 30 `words per
minute <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Words_per_minute>`_. Type on a
keyboard, and you can achieve a much higher throughput: 70-100 words per
minute. Even staying in the realm of pen-writing, if you become
proficient in `Shorthand <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shorthand>`_, the
200 words per minute you can achieve is enough to transcribe a live
conversation, although I am not sure it's still enough to transcribe
your thoughts. Even speaking is, in fact, a relatively slow activity:
around 200 words per minute. Audiobooks are generally sold in a shorter,
abridged version, because a written book is assumed to be read silently
with your eyes and mind, an activity allowing around 250 words per
minute of input. Reading it aloud takes much more time, and audiobook
listeners (and publishers) generally prefer the shorter version to keep
the time investment on the convenience side. People are normally
comfortable with a 150-160 word per minute conversation, and publishers
tend to focus on this target.

That said, there are many techniques to improve our I/O bandwidth. For
input, speed reading techniques allows you more than 300 words per
minute without sacrificing understanding. I've found this very
interesting `blog post about speed
reading <http://pianoer.wordpress.com/2006/02/05/speed-reading-techniques/>`_
I wanted to share. `Rapid Serial Visual Presentation
techniques <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapid_Serial_Visual_Presentation>`_
such as the one you can access through `Zap
Reader <http://www.zapreader.com/>`_ can be used to achieve more than
300 words per minute. Personally, I found it useful only for short
texts. After a while, the fast flashing of words does not allow me to
assimilate concepts properly. Also, I get dizzy.

For output, learn how to type faster is capital when you write code for
a living, and in general for any activity involving communication of
large amounts of data from your brain to someone/something else. As Jeff
Atwood claims in his blog, `programmers are typists first, programmer
next <http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2008/11/we-are-typists-first-programmers-second.html>`_.
