TAMLondon 2010 remarks and comments â€“ Part 2 of n
#################################################
:date: 2010-10-20 01:19
:author: Stefano
:category: Meetings, Opinion
:slug: tamlondon-2010-remarks-and-comments-%e2%80%93-part-2-of-n

TAM London 2010 was highly different from the first European edition in
2009. If I had to describe the 2009 edition in just three words, these
would be: showmen/women, music, science. For this year edition, the
three words would be very different: interviews, feelings, activism.

First, *interviews*. For the sake of argument, I will consider
interviews board of discussion as well. A concrete number of guests
speakers were interviewed, such as Randi (by Ince), Stephen Fry (by Tim
Minchin, more on this later), a panel discussion about skepticism
initiatives, the Tim Minchin night with the interview at the team for
the "Storm movie", and the interview of Melinda Gebbie by Rebecca
Watson. My personal opinion is that interviews should be kept to a
minimum at an event such as TAM, as I feel they tend to become boring
when too long. Twitter messages I spotted during interviews tend to
validate that I'm not the only one holding this opinion. Finally, Tim
Minchin interviewing Stephen Fry was unfortunately characterized by
Tim's strong lack of experience.

Second, *feelings*. This TAM was consistently characterized by depth:
emotional, philosophical, of thought. A broad set of topics was
analyzed, with strong focus on skepticism, education, and scientific
methodology. Insightful quotes were uttered and propagated through
twitter. I personally interpret the overtone of wisdom-oriented topics,
compared to the cheerful 2009 showmanship as a natural intellectual
growth from a "young" to a "mature" TAM.

Third, *activism*. Both the speakers and the audience realized that if a
line exists between being scientifically curious, inquisitive, looking
for evidence to support claims, and being an activist for truth and
correct scientific dissemination, this line is blurring.

It is blurring because, I believe, the point of skepticism is all about
doing the right thing in front of daily quackery: getting people
informed to prevent their exploitation. One would think that education
is a good step to protect against exploitation. Unfortunately it's not
enough: quoting James Randi, "education doesn't necessarily make you
smart. It just makes you educated." It is a moral duty to protect people
from being scammed, exploited and controlled, because it's the right
thing to do. Some of the world's problems are also due to credulity of
false claims and exploitation of credulity.

Everybody is occasionally a skeptic: checking the tyres and the engine
before buying a car is skepticism. It is a method of inquire that
promotes rejection of quackery by verification of claims through
supporting, testable evidence. It is a legal trial applied to notions.
Activist skeptics apply the "check the tyres" approach to every
important claim they encounter. This applies also, but not exclusively,
to misrepresentation of research performed by news: there's a lack of
interest about the peer review mechanism in scientific journalism.
Unfortunately, sensationalism trumps correct dissemination anytime,
leading to `wrong, awkward, counterproductive
dissemination <http://www.phdcomics.com/comics/archive.php?comicid=1174>`_,
generally focused on increasing fear, uncertainty and doubt in the
general public. I already wrote about this on my previous post `"The
challenges of scientific communication", on page
3 <http://forthescience.org/blog/2010/09/13/the-challenges-of-scientific-communication/3/>`_.

Skepticism is in the nature of the curious, positive mind. Through
skepticism, the scientific method, and evidence-based verification of
claims is the only method that gives answers to the mechanisms of the
world we live in, and in particular its many problems. With good and
true knowledge on these problems, we have a chance to find good and true
solutions. If we have wrong and false knowledge, we will only find wrong
and false solutions.

In the next post, I will write about the audience, the speakers and the
talks, commenting on some of them and highlighting their important
points.
