"Google plus" and "What do you love"
####################################
:author: Stefano
:category: Opinion
:tags: google, plus

Since its release, I got access to Google+ and started playing with it,
so I feel obliged to join the crowd and state something about it.

I want to first state one important point. I am not a fan of social
networks, at all, unless when useful (such as LinkedIn). Why? For four
reasons, all boiling down to two main concerns of privacy and relevance:

#. the strongest violations to your privacy (and everyone has one) comes
   not from what you put online, but what others put online with your
   name slapped on it. You have little control on this in general, but a
   highly tied, open "village square" is more prone to induce others to
   talk about personal facts about themselves and others in broad
   daylight. We all need a little privacy, ranging from that time you
   got sick from too much something, to your family's current or past
   health. Even a "How is your mother?" thrown into a large pool of
   contacts by accident may not produce a really pleasant discussion.
   It's a matter of tact, discretion and courtesy, and social networks
   may tend to undermine this out of acquired habit (depending on how
   they are designed). In the end, however, it's always about people.
#. It's very difficult to remove something once it's out on the web.
   Some things are better left forgotten, because it may lead to
   harassment from idiots (whose absolute number is staggering high in
   the crowded square of the internet). Nobody likes to be harassed, and
   occasionally you would just want to remove things with some degree of
   confidence.
#. A central idea of some social networks is that "all friends are
   equal". This is not true. Your boss may be a "friend" in terms of
   semantic connectivity, but it's certainly not a friend in the human
   sense. Similar argument goes for parents, relatives and so on.
   There's a stronger and very, very accurate semantic meaning to what
   we mean with a label assigned to a social connection, which in most
   cases is nuanced to the level of the single person. Squashing it flat
   reminds me of Orwell's 1984
   `Newspeak <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newspeak>`_: "remove all
   shades of
   `meaning <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meaning_%28linguistic%29>`_
   from language, leaving simple
   `dichotomies <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dichotomy>`_ (pleasure and
   pain, happiness and sadness, goodthink and crimethink)" (quote from
   wikipedia). Human lives generate data, and this is the information
   age. We want to have our life, our data, our experiences and memories
   accessible to humans and computers for many practical and
   non-practical reasons. Interpreting our complex human lives with all
   its data, nuances, errors, and inconsistencies by computers is an
   almost impossible task: we are still unable to make computers as
   intelligent as people, so we are making people as dumb as computers,
   to meet halfway.
#. Most of the social network traffic is irrelevant noise. I may be
   interested in some people's posts, but I want my stream of
   information equilibrated, and I want to check some streams more
   frequently, other streams less frequently. Some people may babble a
   lot about things I may have interest once a month. Some others, I
   want to hear as soon as I can.

So long for the motivations. What about Google+ ?

Google+ is Google Wave with a usable interface. I may even be tempted to
say that Wave was just a "phony experiment" to stress the protocol and
backend, but that's just a very hard guess. The shared document concept
is now applied to small chunks of information we post in the streams.
Instead of picking the participants one by one, they can be classified
once and for all and referred as a whole: the Circles. Adding comments,
posting links, images and Google Maps position were already Wave
features, also provided by some Wave widget plugins. I would not be
surprised to see the old Wave widget plugins to become Google+
applications soon, so you can play chess with a friend on Google+, while
others watch and comment the moves (Edit: two weeks after this post
went live, `google announced google+
games <http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/08/games-in-google-fun-that-fits-your.html>`_).
Visibility of a post is nothing but the Wave's adding people to, or
removing from, the post participants list. Google+ also introduces the
social graph features not present in Wave with a strategy similar to
twitter: one-side "following", as opposed to a fully two-sides
"friending" negotiation, making it feel less "personal mailing list of
(huge number of) friends" and more akin to a personal blog with many,
possibly unknown readers. Finally, it removed the Play/Rewind feature,
admittedly useless in this new context.

I liked Wave for its intrinsic underlying power. I may be inconsistent
to say that I don't like Google+. In fact, it's quite ok: it gives much
more control on handling on information, and an adequate feeling about
the concerns I wrote about. It allows a complete removal of all your
Google+ data if you so wish, not just "disabling", and the overall
appearance is fresh, although some improvements are still needed. I
would not use it for anything too personal, but as a complement or even
substitute of Twitter, to post information that may be relevant only to
some people I know.

Closing this post, I want to point your attention also on "`What do you
love? <http://www.wdyl.com/>`_", some kind of Google aggregator that
searches all the available about something you claim you love. I've
never seen it before, so I assume it's something new, but I may be
wrong. Don't bother poking it with four letters words: Google's
engineers know you really love kittens.
