Bad science, good science - Part 1: The scientific article
##########################################################
:date: 2011-04-30 12:00
:author: Stefano
:category: Dissemination
:slug: bad-science-good-science-part-1-the-scientific-article

I see a lot of news announcements with new and extraordinary claims
about scientific discoveries, mainly from daily newspapers or websites
shown by news feeds. I think it's time for me to present my point of
view about how damaging this process is to correct scientific perception
to the public. In addition, I will try to provide you, the reader, with
a checklist for protection from such claims.

In this series of three posts, I will explain you how research is
performed (and in particular its main result, the scientific article),
describe the metrics used to evaluate researchers and journals, and
finally raise your awareness about the actual accuracy of any scientific
discovery reported by the general media. I will present many different
facts and terms, covering a lot of ground, but everything may be boiled
down to one simple statement: **if you are not into a discipline,
correctly understanding the quality and the implications of a scientific
result is really, really hard. Be aware of those not qualified to
understand it and present it correctly. It takes years in the field to
do it.**

In this first article, I will present details about the source of
information: the scientific article. In the second part, I will talk
about the metrics used to evaluate journals, scientists, and individual
scientific results. Finally, in the third part, I will put things into
perspective so that you can use a critical eye when reading scientific
news on traditional media. Hopefully, I will raise awareness on what is
the real scientific process of discovery, and what are instead far flung
statements made either for sensationalism or simple misunderstanding of
the actual scientific finding.

Anatomy of a paper: basic structure
-----------------------------------

You are a researcher, and you spent the last six months tinkering with
an idea you had. You learned something new about it, and it's time to
let the world know what you learned, writing down a "scientific
article", also known as "paper". After a complex editorial procedure,
your article will finally be published on a scientific journal, so that
other researchers can learn what you learned and eventually solve a
problem they have.

Given this premise, it is clear that the essence of a paper is to report
what you evaluated, how you evaluated it, the results you obtained and
which conclusions you reached from these results. The structure of this
presentation is more or less the same across all the scientific
disciplines. Let's examine this structure in more detail.

Title, authors list and affiliations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first entry we come across in an article is the title. The title
gives a quick excerpt of what the paper is about: by looking at the
title, you should be able to understand at a glance what it presents,
and what kind of results are obtained.

The author list contains the people who worked on the paper. This means
not the pure writing, but the actual science: working in the lab,
obtaining the samples, doing the data analysis, checking other similar
papers and so on. Any non-trivial work done for a paper normally grants
you authorship. Depending on the discipline, the order of the names may
have importance or not, but in general, the first name is the **main
author**, the one who did most of the work and may be considered the
person who made things happen. The last name, on the other hand, is
generally the head of the group, either a professor or a scientific
manager. Names in the middle are those who gave support role, such as
they did minor things, or they gave directions for the paper to happen.
This is the area where Postdoctoral researcher normally fall in when
they are supervising a student (which normally is the first author). For
some disciplines order is very important; for others, in particular
those with strong interdisciplinary nature and lots of collaborators,
the order is less important and an alphabetical or arbitrary order may
be followed, except maybe for the first author for greater visibility.

Generally, one author is also indicated as the **corresponding author**:
he or she is the one in charge of dealing with the journal editor during
the submission process (going from a draft to a published article in the
journal) and also answers to any inquire about the research done in the
paper, now and in the future. In general, the corresponding author is a
relatively stable member of the group, either the professor or some well
established postdoc.

The affiliation is the academic institution or company the authors work
for. This is not necessarily the entity who gives the money for the
research or the salary. This is the entity who hires and provide local
services to the author so that he or she can perform its research job.

The Abstract
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The abstract is a short excerpt of the article, but longer than the
title. It is generally around some tens lines of text, describing in
more details the content of the article and the methodology used. It
generally does not contain detailed conclusions, just a general
description of what has been done. Today, the abstract is also
complemented with keywords to make it relevant for specific disciplines,
not unlike the internet practice of tagging. This greatly simplifies
searching.

The Article Itself
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The main body of the article is where the meaty stuff is. In general,
the article is divided into subsections: the **Introduction** gives the
current state of the art for the discipline and puts the presented work
into perspective; the **Method** (or Experimental setup) describes the
approach used to perform the work, such as the used process, the
substances (together with their purity and who sold them), quantities,
solvents, timings and temperatures (e.g. for a reaction to occur), plus
any relevant caveats and conditions that may be important to reproduce
the same procedure, so that any other researcher anywhere else in space
or time can redo what was done; the **Results** presents the obtained
data, any additional evaluation performed on these data, and any insight
that can be inferred from them; the **Conclusions** contain a short
"take home message", shrinking the scientific finding into a clear
summary report; and finally the **Acknowledgements** allows the authors
to thank people who gave small help for the paper and, most important,
the financial agencies who pay the salary. In some cases, it is also
customary to disclose any conflict of interest (commercial or otherwise)
held by the authors.

The last part of the article anatomy, the citation list, deserves a
section alone: it defines its genealogy within the scientific research
progress.

Genealogy of a paper: the Citation List
---------------------------------------

When you perform research, generally you don't start anew. It's
basically impossible that you do something completely unheard of.
Generally, there are other people in your discipline, working on similar
topics, or even the same one. Part of being a researcher is having the
knowledge of the current up-to-date findings and developments in your
main topic, and any collateral topic you may need to do your research.
Establishing such knowledge requires a throughout **bibliographic
search** of papers written in the past. Such search takes a lot of time
(to download, print, read up to some hundreds of papers and get a sense
of what is known, what is not known, where there is space for
innovation, etc.), but once you know the bibliography of your field, you
have to rebuild it only if you change research field or topic (e.g.
different molecule, or different gene). Knowledge of bibliography, and
keeping up-to-date with recent developments, is an important but
generally very neglected part of the researcher working schedule.

When your paper is conceptually bound to previous publications (either
because you compare against their results, use their method or part of
it, or point out a different strategy to solve a shared problem) it is
important to cite each of them. Every time you call attention to a
previous article, a footnote reference is added to the authors, journal
name, volume, page number and year of publication of this article.
Besides giving recognition to someone's else work, anyone interested in
more details can now fetch the publication, see what they claim, which
limitations they had, and eventually compare it with your recent work.
This process develops naturally into a tree of connections that brings
back to the origin of the discipline or methodology. An example may be
the following phrase in an article

::

    "In order to evaluate the molecular energetics, the methodology developed
    by Doe and Johnson [1] has been used, corrected with the superduper correction
    as detailed by Francis [2]"

    [1]: J. Doe and M. Johnson,
         "A new methodology for the evaluation of energies",
         Journal of Fantastic Results, 24, pp. 36-46 (2004)
    [2]: M. Francis,
         "Superduper correction: improving the energy in small compounds",
         Journal of Reliable Corrections, 36, pp. 1824-3451 (2005)

The number of times a given article is cited by others may give an idea
of how important its content is for other researchers: a paper that gets
cited by three or four other articles may be close to irrelevant; a
paper that is cited hundreds or thousands of times means that its
content started a new technique, or even a new discipline. Cases where
the original submission is obscure and forgotten, to be rediscovered
tens of years later did certainly happen in the past, but communication
and scientific exchange was different back then. Today, it's less likely
to happen. Scientists today make careers on developing new ideas and
asking money to further develop these ideas. If a new idea comes by, and
appears to be productive, the hunger for grants is so strong that it
gets under assault for additional investigation in no time. In addition,
the occurrence of sudden breakthroughs that change everything are not as
frequent as you may think. Research generally proceeds slowly, one tiny
step at a time from different sources, trying to balance scientific
rigor, frequency of Eureka moments, human resources, duration and aim of
the project, additional tasks (authoring of articles, application of
grants, teaching, supervising), synchronization with collaborators,
brainstorming and data sharing in meetings and emails, software and
hardware problems.

Taxonomy: The different types of scientific paper
-------------------------------------------------

There are different types of scientific paper, and depending on their
type, different consideration should be done.

A**Standard (or Regular) article** is a scientific article which
presents a new method, procedure or finding. It's the most common kind
of paper, normally between 6 and 20 pages long, and with around some
tens of citations towards older papers. They report a new scientific
result, pushing the human knowledge a bit forward. Very few of them are
groundbreaking. As I said, science proceeds in small steps, and when
enough small steps have been collected, someone will have enough
high-ground vision to see something new. Standard articles may be cited
by others a lot or very little, depending on their impact on the
scientific community. We will examine the concept of impact later on.

A**Review** is a collation of the state of the art in a specific topic.
Reviews are normally performed when some topic has been explored for
some time and either a reputed scientist or a journal editor is given
the task to "clean up and make the point". Reviews don't contain new
science: they merely sum up the relevant steps forward done by others,
integrating different techniques and approaches (for example, laboratory
experiments and computer simulations) into a single logical
presentation. The size of a review can be from ten pages up to one
hundred and more, and the number of older papers cited may well fall
close to the thousand or even more, depending how deep is the review and
how broad is the analysis. Reviews tend to attract lots of citations
from subsequent papers, being the one-stop resource for acquired
knowledge on the topic for researchers with potentially different
specialization and research focus. There are scientific journals purely
dedicated to reviews.

A **Letter** is a small article, generally less than four pages long,
presenting an interesting result for others to read, as soon as
possible. Letters are normally written when there's a sense of urgency.
Publishing a letter generally takes less time, because the article is
short and the publishing process is streamlined for a quick release.

A **Proceedings** is a grouping of scientific contributes provided
within the context of an academic conference. Periodically, academics
organize conferences to show their latest findings to others, as well as
showing off their latest Mac Air, colored laser pointer and enjoying
coffee breaks (the best collaboration-builder events). Within the
context of the conference setup, an editorial committee may be deployed
to collect papers from the conference speakers and contributors. These
papers are then evaluated (more on this later) and published as a single
booklet, generally under a scientific journal's special edition.
Proceedings articles may be high quality or "low" quality, depending on
the conference, the editorial committee and the contributors. It may
happen that articles for a Proceedings are not "prime research", but
summarize the latest results of the research group, thus acting as an
"internal review" of the group that publishes it, with a sprinkle of
original research just to add something new.

**Books and patents**: these are different communication channels,
obeying different rules from the ones above. Books are normally made
either as an aggregate of different researchers contributes (e.g. one
chapter per contributor) or by a single author or small group to present
an aggregation of knowledge deserving a specialized, highly detailed
treatment. Patents are mostly business related. For some disciplines
involving a lot of money, such as biology, pharmacology and the like,
patenting is one way of guaranteeing a potential return of investment,
if the patent is used commercially. Small digression on this: although
the common mantra you may hear is "those evil pharmas... (rumble)
patents... (rumble)" please consider this: a drug takes years to be
discovered, developed and tested for safety, thus having very little
time to return the expenses before the patent expires and the exclusive
rights expire. Drugs don't invent themselves, and researchers, equipment
and clinical tests cost money, a lot of money.

Summing up
----------

To sum up this first part, we discussed:

-  We want to understand the difference between real science and the
   science as reported by newspapers and tabloids. These two latter
   entities have very little overlap with formal scientific presentation
   and a huge tendency towards misinterpretation, exaggeration and
   oversimplification.
-  We understood the anatomy of a scientific paper, how its structure is
   organized to presents an argument through an experiment, generally as
   a small step to answer some obscure question of a larger topic. The
   presentation must provide details for reproducibility by future
   scientists. We learned about the authors and the meaning of the
   naming order.
-  We learned about the bibliography, and in particular the citation
   system, and how the number of times a paper is cited by others may
   represent its importance for other researchers.
-  We learned there are different types of articles, and their aim,
   scope and scientific level may be very different.

