Genetic testing for the masses (including myself): 23andme
##########################################################
:date: 2012-10-05 19:39
:author: Stefano
:category: genetics, Websites
:tags: 23andme
:slug: genetic-testing-for-the-masses-including-myself-23andme
:attachments: blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/23andme.jpg

Two years ago, I learned about 23andme.com, a company that does genetic
testing for health, traits and ancestry. The idea is as follows: you
send them a sample of your saliva (containing your DNA, I guess from
cells in the mouth mucosa), they process it and check for specific
genes. Then, they compare your genetic information with the currently
known research about health (higher or lower chance of getting some
diseases), ancestry (maternal and paternal) and genetic traits (color of
the eyes, blood group).

It took me a while to decide and take the test: the idea of giving my
DNA information to a private company, with information stored and
available on the net, didn't appeal me at all. Call me paranoid, but I
can't help it. I made some reputation checks with some trusted people I
know, learned that the company has close ties with Google (a co-founder
is Brin's wife) and decided for it. The main push, however, was
curiosity. In my genetic code it is written how my biological computer
works, how it can break, and where it comes from. Too much to resist.
After you place your order, they send you a sampling container, which is
a test tube with a buffer solution in the cap.

.. image:: http://forthescience.org/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/23andme.jpg
   :alt: image
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

What I found out is appealing: I learned that genetically I am a very
healthy person, confirmed some hypotheses about my ancestors, and
realized I have superpowers: I am immune to the most common strain of
viral gastroenteritis. I left my genetic information in their database
and, as long as I keep paying a small fee, they perform additional
analyses on my sample for new genes. I keep receiving updates about new
findings around once a month.

Do I recommend it? Yes and no. The most important point to keep into
account is that, once you open the box of your genetic information,
there's no way back. What you learn may change forever how you see
yourself, your past, your future and the future of your children.
23andme keeps you health information hidden to you unless unlocked
manually. I didn't even ponder a second about it, and clicked on all the
"show my health information" buttons I could find. I cannot deal with
not knowing, regardless how bad it can be. Knowledge may also allow to
take action whenever possible, but for some conditions there's not much
to be done.

