Harvest - Part 2
################
:author: stefano
:category: Beekeeping

After a couple of weeks from the harvesting of the frames, it's now time
to extract the honey. Frames are decapped with a metallic spatula, and
inserted into a centrifugal radial extractor. This one is for six
frames, and it's definitely a big one

.. image:: http://forthescience.org/gaia/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/IMG_3644.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image

The capping wax is inserted into a special bag, and will also be
extracted via centrifugal force

.. image:: http://forthescience.org/gaia/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/IMG_3679.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image

It takes around 10 minutes of spinning to get the frames clean of honey.
The difference in weight between an empty and a full frame is
incredible.

.. figure:: http://forthescience.org/gaia/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/IMG_3678.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image

Honey is obtained from the bottom of the extractor and coarse-filtered
with a simple sieve

.. figure:: http://forthescience.org/gaia/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/IMG_3681.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image

The resulting filtered honey is then filtered again using a smaller mesh
filter bag

.. figure:: http://forthescience.org/gaia/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/IMG_3680.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image

The resulting product is not perfectly transparent. The reason is that
small air bubbles are still in the honey and will take a day or two to
emerge to the surface. When this happens, the honey can be extracted
from the bottom, giving a perfectly clear product that can be bottled
and sold as is

.. image:: http://forthescience.org/gaia/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/IMG_3687.jpg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px
   :alt: image

This year's production was definitely abundant. The honey flow was
consistent and large, and the colonies grew beyond my initial
expectation. It has been a mild year with little rain and wind, and not
excessively high temperatures, the perfect conditions for a high
production. I am trying to get the final numbers (weight, water content,
and pollen analysis), and I will publish them here if I get them. For
now, what I can say is that the product definitely tasted like linden
honey. This doesn't surprise me, as two huge linden trees were just
outside the bee garden. It could be classified as monofloral honey only
if the pollen analysis satisfies the national criteria.

