Backups!
########
:author: Stefano
:category: Backups, Security

A friend of mine just reported me a very tragic event. His bag with his
laptop and his backups hard drive was stolen. I can feel his pain,
having experienced the very same situation once, and I am writing here
hints for him and the rest of the world to protect yourself from this
eventuality.

**Buy cheap**. Computers can be expensive to buy again, but you can
tolerate more the loss of a 13 inches macbook than a 17 inches macbook
pro. Of course, you should buy the minimum that satisfies your actual
needs, but if you can survive without a feature, or buy it external, you
can spend less money and therefore lose less in case of theft.

**Encrypt everything**. As our lives are more and more represented on
digital media, it could be a complete and utter disaster if they fall
into the wrong hands. Bank access, credit card numbers, all our online
passwords, health documents, tax documents, non open intellectual
property, your MP3s, movies, family photos, software licenses, emails...
in the hands of a thief ? Use `Truecrypt <http://www.truecrypt.org/>`_
to create an encrypted area on your media. As a key, you can use
"something you know", like a passphrase or "something you have", like a
well defined file acting as your key. I strongly advise against the
latter: you can lose your keyfile, meaning that under no circumstance
you will be able to access your data again. If the file is accidentally
modified (e.g. it's a MP3 file and some music program changes the ID3
metadata info), the file is no longer a valid key. Ditto. A long
passphrase uses your brain, which is less prone to corruption. Choose
wisely: you will not use this passphrase often, so it is something that
under no circumstance you can forget. Anything chosen in the bout of the
moment will be long forgotten the next time you open the backup. Of
course, it is strictly important that nobody (yes, I really mean it,
**nobody**) knows, can spy on, or can guess your passphrase.

For **movable storage** (like SD cards, USB keys and solid state disks
you use for everyday data handling) use Truecrypt to create an encrypted
disk image file onto the storage device. Do not encrypt the whole card.
Instead leave a readable area, and put a textfile named
"RETURN\_LOST\_DRIVE\_DETAILS.TXT" containing something like "if found
please contact me at me@example.com". Remember the TXT extension so that
windows users are not intimidated by an unknown file, as these devices
can be used for `social
engineering <http://www.darkreading.com/security/perimeter/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=208803634>`_.
Encryption cannot work for SD card aimed at cameras or MP3 players, as
the hardware device won't be able to access the encrypted area. Complain
with your camera/pod producer to add Truecrypt support (don't hold your
breath). If you use the SD as a disk for your computer, there's no
problem.

**Computer**: use the native disk FileVault encryption of Mac, and turn
off autologin. Alternatively, create a Truecrypt volume and open it
every time you perform login, but remember this won't protect some parts
of your personal life, such as your browser cache, from curious eyes.
Using Truecrypt has the advantage of being cross platform: you can move
your encrypted disk image and read it on Linux or Windows as well, while
the Mac encrypted storage format can be opened only by Mac (as far as I
know).

**Backups medias**: For optical devices, remember that CDs and DVDs tend
to become unreadable with time. It makes sense to refresh your backup
media every 5 years. In this span of time, you will likely have a larger
storage format, allowing you to concentrate your data (e.g. from 5 CDs
to 1 DVD). Of course, you have a single point of failure in that DVD, so
you have to make two exact copies of them. Use different brands for the
two physical supports! This protects you from a faulty shipment. Optical
devices in general don't become completely unreadable, but tend to
develop areas of unreadability. If this happens, with some doctoring and
the second optical media you should be able to recreate the original
archive completely. It's a good idea to store the md5 of the files you
burn. This hint however is rather obsolete, as optical devices are used
less and less.

**Backup hard drives**: if you prefer to get rid of optical media
completely, and go hard disk, my personal solution is to buy a small
disk and encrypt it with Truecrypt, whole. You are not supposed to lose
backup disks, and if you lose them it should not be a tragedy. If you
want to feel safer, use the textfile trick, but it should not be needed
for backup disks. Once you get the encrypted partition, put the contents
of your computer onto the disk with the following script

.. code-block:: bash

    #!/bin/sh
    SOURCE_DIRS="$HOME:/another/dir:/and/so/on"
    TARGET_DIR="/Volumes/Backup/laptop/"

    # if the external drive is not there, complain and stop
    if [ ! -e "$TARGET_DIR" ]
    then
     echo Target directory does not exist!
     exit 1
    fi

    IFS=:
    date=`date +%Y%m%d-%H%M%S`
    pushd .
    cd ~/
    /usr/bin/rsync --backup --suffix="-backup-$date" --progress -av $SOURCE_DIRS "$TARGET_DIR"
    popd

This script automatically backs up everything in your home directory
onto the backup disk. New files will be added. Old files you modified
since the last backup will be renamed to append the date, and the new,
updated file will be stored. This command never deletes anything from
your backup disk. It always adds. Run this script with some frequency,
as high as you feel safe. If the backup disk breaks down or is stolen,
you will have the most recent files on your computer. If the computer is
stolen, you can recover the files from the backup. You will have some
cleanup to do, but still...

Sooner or later the disk will fill up. Buy a new, larger disk from a
different company (again, to protect you from a faulty stock). Copy all
the contents of your old backup disk into the new one, and continue
adding data to the new one from your computer. Eventually you can remove
old, unused stuff from your computer now, because you know that at least
two copies exists: one in the first disk, one in the second. When the
second disk fills up, repeat the procedure with a new, larger hard
drive. Store all your backup drives in a safe, fire resistant place.
Banks are specialized for this.

As you can see, older files gets replicated more than recent ones, but
even the most recent file is always present in at least two copies: one
on the latest backup disk, one on the computer. Even if one of your
backup disks breaks down in 10 years, you will have the same data
duplicated on later disks.

Now, there are only two points to address. The first one is to find the
sweet spot in increased hard disk size that allows you to fill it up in
approximately one year, so you can archive it and move on to a newer
hard drive. This depends on your usage intensity. If you put large,
transitory files on your computer, remember to delete them before
running the backup. Same if you move large files around, they will be
copied again (remember, the script never deletes anything).
The second point is relative to the most recent files you have on your
computer: they are not backed up, so unless you run your script every
day, you risk to lose something more than a day worth of work. For this,
you can have a small USB key. You can trash the contents at the next run
of the script.

What about online backups ? Well... do you trust them ? If you do, go
for it. I don't.

Summing up, the basic rules are:

-  Encrypt everything
-  Plan for worst case scenario
-  At least duplicate, better n-plicate
-  Keep live data and backup in two different locations
-  Frequency of backups is tuned to the amount of work you are willing
   to redo

