Why Gaia?
#########
:date: 2013-06-11 21:41
:author: Stefano
:category: Opinion, Personal
:slug: why-gaia

Choosing the name of `my new blog <http://gaia.forthescience.org/blog>`_
was a problem I worked on for some time. I wanted to stay within my
domain, forthescience.org, and I wanted the blog to be mostly about
simple living, outdoor activities, beekeeping, and so on, while
maintaining a scientific approach to the presentation of these topics. I
therefore needed a central theme embracing their broad spectrum.

As humans, we are just the latest gimmick in a big show started billions
of years ago. Many species have come and gone during this time, and many
more will in the future. We humans have apparently little control on the
complexity of our environment, exactly because this complexity emerges
from an extremely large set of interactions and feedbacks we have little
knowledge or control on. Additionally, these interactions can be
extremely non-linear, meaning that they may either resist to changes, or
run off wildly for even small perturbations of the dependent factors.

I first heard about the Gaia hypothesis when I was 13, in a PC game
called SimEarth. The central idea is that the planet Earth is what can
be considered as a self-regulating "superorganism" given by the
dependencies among biota (plants, animals, bacteria, fungi, algae) and
the inorganic environment in which they live (atmosphere composition,
temperature, water level and acidity). This hypothesis, developed mainly
by `James Lovelock <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Lovelock>`_ in
the 70s, found more and more supporting evidence, and it triggered a
better understanding of the complexity of the Earth system. Experiments
such as `Biosphere 2 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosphere_2>`_ made
rather clear how a stable, self-sustaining system is hard to establish,
and how many subtle interactions are hidden and unexpected. This network
of interactions, on a global scale, is what Lovelock calls "Gaia".

I must admit I read very little of Lovelock, `and of what I
read <http://www.amazon.com/The-Vanishing-Face-Gaia-Warning/dp/0465019072>`_,
I don't fully agree with some of his personal opinions, in particular
about the importance of computational modeling and the actions that one
can take, yet the point of Gaia as a complex system of interactions is
well established, factual and verified by experiments both on the field
and in computational models.

That said, I decided to explore a very small subsystem of these
interactions at a personal level: bees are important pollinators,
producers of useful substances such as honey, wax, and propolis, but
also allowing plants to reproduce; propolis and wax are used in
woodworking, another dreamy interest of mine (dreamy because I lack the
tools and the space); growing an extremely tiny but pleasant part of my
diet is a rewarding and relaxing activity, where I learned the
importance of soil characteristics, the different chemical and physical
requirements for different species of plants, techniques such as
hydroponics and aquaponics, mushroom growing, and integrated cultivars
to take advantage of dependencies among species and improve production.
I took great interest in Jared Diamond's Collapse, and its reporting of
Tikopia as a long established `self-sustained islet in the
pacific <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tikopia>`_.

Keeping bees, growing plants, building gardens, working wood are
difficult tasks that require knowledge of biology, mathematics,
chemistry and physics, in addition to artistic and practical skills.
This blog aims at exploring some of these topics, disentangling a tiny
section of the interactions' snarl for fun and cultural profit.
